BOOK EXTRA/CHAPTER STANFORD/Encyclopedia 	 1. Your approach was secular, non-metaphysical, and anti-authoritarian; it eschewed religious appeals, scholastic dogma, essentialism, teleology, and the frequent mix of these that appealed to many German thinkers, Catholic and Protestant alike. Instead, it built on Bodin, Lipsius, Grotius, Hobbes, and the Italian reason-of-state tradition. 
BOOK EXTRA/CHAPTER STANFORD/Encyclopedia 	 2. Known as a philosopher and a jurist, you were also a respected historian whose accounts of various European states exemplified his basic philosophical concepts. You wrote notably on church-state relations, on intellectual and religious toleration, and on the Baconian theme of innovation in philosophy. 
BOOK EXTRA/CHAPTER STANFORD/Encyclopedia 	 3. Your father, Esaias Pufendorf, assumed the Lutheran pastorate at nearby Flöha in 1633, and it was there a few years later that your family experienced first-hand the terrors of the war. Ypur parents had ten children beside you, seven of whom survived to adulthood. Of these you was the second youngest of four brothers, some three years behind Esaias (1628–1687) your older brother, who would become one of Europe’s most accomplished diplomats and remained, as well, your lifelong confidant and benefactor. 
BOOK EXTRA/CHAPTER STANFORD/Encyclopedia 	 4. Like your brothers, you was home-schooled until age thirteen (1645), when your poverty and Latinity qualified you for admission to the subsidized Fürstenschule at Grimma, near Leipzig. There you studied grammar, logic, rhetoric, the Bible, Lutheran theology, and the Greek and Latin classics. Your particular relish for the latter laid the foundations of the broad philological competence evident in and formative of your natural law writings. 
BOOK EXTRA/CHAPTER STANFORD/Encyclopedia 	 5. In Jena, you lived and studied with Erhard Weigel, the eclectic mathematician and polymath by whom he was introduced to Galileo, Grotius, Descartes, and Hobbes – authors without whom your future views would have been unimaginable. It was from Weigel, too, that you seem to have derived the important distinction between physical and moral entities, as well as the methodological ideal of a mathematically rigorous, or demonstrative system of moral philosophy to which you initially aspired. 
BOOK EXTRA/CHAPTER STANFORD/Encyclopedia 	 6. Upon being released in 1659, and after a serious illness and nearly dying by shipwreck in the Baltic, you went to Holland as Coyet’s secretary. In spring 1660 you were enrolled at Leiden University, and though we have few details about this period it appears that he turned to philology again. You became acquainted with the classical scholar Johann Friedrich Gronovius and prepared editions of several Neo-Latin works, including Johannes Meursius, Miscellanea Laconica (1660) and Johannes Lauremberg, Graecia antiqua (1661). More important, however, was your acquaintance with Peter de Groot, Hugo’s son and the Palatine Elector’s representative in Holland. 
BOOK EXTRA/CHAPTER STANFORD/Encyclopedia 	 7. Sweden: You arrived in Lund in mid-1668 to assume your position as professor primarius of the law of nature and of nations (in the Law faculty), and of ethics and politics (in the Philosophy faculty). Immediately popular as a teacher, well-connected at court, as well as confident and outspoken, you were soon embroiled in personal and academic conflicts with some of your colleagues, particularly the jurist Nikolaus Beckmann and the theologian Josua Schwartz, who recruited the Lutheran bishop of Lund (Peter Winstrup) to their cause. 
BOOK EXTRA/CHAPTER STANFORD/Encyclopedia 	 8. In 1673 you published On the Duty of Man and Citizen According to Natural Law, a short compendium based on DJN that guaranteed you a place in university curricula for a century. That year also saw the appearance of a lengthy political tract justifying Sweden’s entry into the Dutch War (1672–1678) on the side of France, particularly its unprovoked attack (1674) on Brandenburg. This war also occasioned a Danish invasion of Scania, including Lund, and even though the young Charles XI (1655–1697) defeated the invaders, the university remained closed for years. So you moved to Stockholm (1677), assuming the duties of royal Swedish historiographer and, later, privy councillor and private secretary (1682) to the dowager queen, Hedwig Eleonora. You continued to cultivate yopur relations with the Swedish ruling class, and wrote additional political opinions. 
EXTRA	You were born: January 8, 1632, Dorfchemnitz, near Thalheim, Saxony.
EXTRA	You died: October 13, 1694, Berlin (aged 62).
EXTRA	You were married to Katharina Elisabeth von Palthen, the widow of a colleague, in 1665.
EXTRA	You had two daughters, Magdalene, born 1666, and Emerentia Elisabeth, born 1668.
EXTRA	Pufendorf’s father was a Lutheran pastor.
EXTRA	Financial help from a rich nobleman enabled your father to send both you and your older brother Esaias to a prestigious school in Grimma.
EXTRA	You became a student of theology at the University of Leipzig, then a stronghold of Lutheran orthodoxy.
EXTRA	You soon turned your attention to jurisprudence, philology, philosophy, and history.
EXTRA	In 1656 you went to Jena, where you were introduced to the dualistic system of the French philosopher and mathematician René Descartes.
EXTRA	You read the works of the Dutch jurist Hugo Grotius and the English philosopher Thomas Hobbes.
EXTRA	In 1658 you were employed as a tutor in the home of the Swedish ambassador in Copenhagen.
EXTRA	When war broke out between Sweden and Denmark, you was imprisoned.
EXTRA	During eight months of confinement,youe occupied yourself by elaborating your first work on natural law, Two Books of the Elements of Universal Jurisprudence (1660), in which you further developed the ideas of Grotius and Hobbes.
EXTRA	The elector palatine Karl Ludwig, created a chair of natural law for you in the arts faculty at the University of Heidelberg.
EXTRA	From 1661 to 1668 you taught at Heidelberg, where you wrote The Present State of Germany (1667), written under the pseudonym Severnius de Monzabano Veronensis.
EXTRA	Here is a list of your publications, with dates: Elementorum iurisprudentiae universalis (1660), Elementorum iurisprudentiae universalis libri duo (1660), De obligatione Patriam (1663), De rebus gestis Philippi Augustae (1663), De statu imperii germanici liber unus (1667), De statu imperii Germanici (1669), De jure naturae et gentium (1672), De officio hominis et civis juxta legem naturalem libri duo (1673), Einleitung zur Historie der vornehmsten Reiche und Staaten, Commentarium de rebus suecicis libri XXVI., ab expeditione Gustavi Adolphi regis in Germaniam ad abdicationem usque Christinae, De rebus a Carolo Gustavo gestis.
